[Docs] Adds a migration guide SQL compatible null handling (#16704)
apache/druid: docs/release-info/migr-ansi-sql-null.md

  ~
  ~   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  ~
  ~ Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  ~ software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  ~ "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  ~ KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  ~ specific language governing permissions and limitations
  ~ under the License.
-->
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

In Apache Druid 28.0.0, the default [null handling](../querying/sql-data-types.md#null-values) mode changed to be compliant with the SQL standard:

The SQL standard defines any comparison to null to be unknown.
Therefore, according to this three-value logic, `x <> 'some value'` only returns non-null values.

Now, Druid stores segments in a SQL compatible null handling mode by default.

The default Druid configurations for SQL compatible null handling mode is as follows:

* `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`
* `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans=true`
* `druid.generic.useThreeValueLogicForNativeFilters=true` 

Note Druid has always applied three-value logic by default to expressions.

> Therefore, queries such as `(x+y) <> ‘some value’` exclude null values even prior to Druid 28.0.0.

Reviewer: this example isn't quite correct these days because the `(x + y)` plans to a separate virtual column and uses native not equals filter which only does 3vl if `druid.generic.useThreeValueLogicForNativeFilters=true`. If you change it to something like `x <> y` then it plans into a pure expression filter.

That said, if the original example was a native query written with a pure expression filter this would be true, but when using SQL we only plan into pure expression filters when there are no other options. Direct column comparisons are one of those things that tend to be expression filters, there are some other cases too but I don't remember too well off the top of my head.

Author: I removed this. It seems like it is not necessary for this topic.

> At query time, Druid treats data from segments written with the legacy two-value logic as follows:

Reviewer: given that we discuss the legacy mode right after this, i wonder if it is needed since these seem like obvious statements.

- Empty strings, `''` are non-null values.
- 0 is a non-null value.

Follow the [Null handling tutorial](../tutorials/tutorial-sql-null.md) to learn how the default null handling works in Druid.

## Legacy null handling and two-value logic

> Prior to Druid 28.0.0, Druid defaulted to a legacy mode which used default values instead of nulls.

Reviewer: i wonder if in this section we should mention that people who are using this mode are the target audience of this migration guide (or put that somewhere)

- Numeric columns can not represent null valued rows. Gherefore Druid stores 0 instead of null.

In legacy mode, numeric columns do not have a null value bitmap, and so can have slightly decreased segment sizes.

The Druid configurations for the deprecated legacy mode are as follows:

* `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=true`
* `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans=false`
* `druid.generic.useThreeValueLogicForNativeFilters=true`

Note that these configurations are deprecated and scheduled for removal.

## Migrate to SQL compliant mode

If your business logic relies on the behavior of legacy mode, you can emulate the behavior in the following ways:

* Modify your ingestion SQL and ingestion specs to handle nulls at ingestion time.
    This means that you are modifying incoming data.
    For example, replacing a null for a string column with an empty string or a 0 for a numeric column.
    However, it means that your existing queries should operate as if Druid were in legacy mode.
    If you do not care about preserving null values, this is a good option for you.
* Update your SQL queries to handle the new behavior at query time.

>     This means you preserve the incoming data with nulls in tact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This means you preserve the incoming data with nulls intact.
```

| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`| `my_string`| 99 |
| `2024-01-02T00:00:00.000Z`| `empty`| 0 |
| `2024-01-03T00:00:00.000Z`| `empty`| 0 |

### Handle null values at query time

If you want to maintain null values in your data within Druid, you can emulate the legacy null handling mode mode as follows:

- Modify inequality queries to include null values.
  `x <> 'some value'` becomes `(x <> 'some value' OR x IS NULL)`.
- Use COALESCE to replace nulls with a value.
  `x + 1` becomes ` COALESCE(numeric_value, 0)+1`

Consider the following Druid datasource `null_example`:

| `__time` | `string_examle` | `number_example`|
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`| `my_string`| 99 |
| `2024-01-02T00:00:00.000Z`| `empty`| 0 |
| `2024-01-03T00:00:00.000Z`| `null`| null |

Druid excludes null strings from equality comparisons. For example:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) AS count_example
FROM "null_example"
WHERE "string_example"<> 'my_string'
```

Druid returns 1 because null is considered unknown: neither equal nor inequal to the value.

To count null values in the result, use an OR operator:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) AS count_example
FROM "null_example"

> WHERE ("string_example"<> 'my_string') OR "string_example" IS NULL

Reviewer: you can also use `WHERE "string_example" IS DISTINCT FROM 'my_string'` though it doesn't really save much

```

Druid returns 2.

Similarly, arithmatec operators on null return null. For example:

```sql
SELECT "number_example" + 1 AS additon_example
FROM "null_example"
```

Druid returns the following because, according to the SQL standard, null + any value is null:

| `addition_example`|
| -- |
| 100 |
| 1 |
| null |

Use NVL to avoid nulls with arithmetic. For example:

```sql
SELECT NVL("number_example",0) + 1 AS additon_example

> FROM"null_example"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FROM "null_example"
```

---
id: migr-ansi-sql-null
title: "Migration guide: SQL compliant mode"
sidebar_label: SQL compliant mode
---

<!--
  ~ Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  ~ or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  ~ distributed with this work for additional information
  ~ regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  ~ to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  ~ "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  ~ with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  ~
  ~   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  ~
  ~ Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  ~ software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  ~ "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  ~ KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  ~ specific language governing permissions and limitations
  ~ under the License.
-->
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> In Apache Druid 28.0.0, the default [null handling](../querying/sql-data-types.md#null-values) mode changed to be compliant with the SQL standard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Apache Druid 28.0.0, the default [null handling](../querying/sql-data-types.md#null-values) mode changed to be compliant with the ANSI SQL standard.
```

> This guide provides strategies for Druid operators who rely on the legacy Druid null handling behavior in their applications to transition to SQL compliant mode.

Reviewer 2: Saying just operators makes me think ppl who administer druid

```suggestion
This guide provides strategies for Druid operators and users who rely on the legacy Druid null handling behavior in their applications to transition to SQL compliant mode.
```

> Legacy is scheduled to be removed from Druid. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The legacy behavior is scheduled to be removed from Druid. We recommend you migrate to the new compliant behavior prior to the removal so that you time to make and test changes. 
```

> ## SQL compliant null handling in Druid

Reviewer 2: Do we needto say `in Druid`?

As of Druid 28.0.0, Druid writes segments in a SQL compatible null handling mode by default.
This means that Druid stores null values distinctly from empty strings for string dimensions and distinctly from 0 for numeric dimensions.

> This can impact your application behavior because SQL the standard defines any comparison to null to be unknown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can impact your application behavior because the ANSI SQL standard defines any comparison to null to be unknown.
```

> According to this three-value logic, `x <> 'some value'` only returns non-null values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
According to this three-valued logic, `x <> 'some value'` only returns non-null values.
```

> The default Druid configurations for SQL compatible null handling mode is as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default Druid configurations for 28.0.0 and later that enable SQL compatible null handling mode are the following:
```

* `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`
* `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans=true`
* `druid.generic.useThreeValueLogicForNativeFilters=true` 

Follow the [Null handling tutorial](../tutorials/tutorial-sql-null.md) to learn how the default null handling works in Druid.

## Legacy null handling and two-value logic

> Prior to Druid 28.0.0, Druid defaulted to a legacy mode which stored default values instead of nulls.

Reviewer 2: The rest of this block should be past tense too imo since we're describing legacy behavior

> In legacy mode, Druid segments created at ingestion time have the following characteristics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In legacy mode, Druid segments created at ingestion time had the following characteristics:
```

> - String columns can not distinguish an empty string, '', from null.
>     Therefore, Druid treats them both as interchangeable values.
> - Numeric columns can not represent null valued rows.
>     Therefore Druid stores 0 instead of null. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- String columns couldn't distinguish an empty string, '', from null.
    Therefore, Druid treated them both as interchangeable values.
- Numeric columns couldn't represent null valued rows.
    Therefore Druid stored 0 instead of null. 
```

> The Druid configurations for the deprecated legacy mode are as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Druid configurations for the deprecated legacy mode were the following:
```

* `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=true`
* `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans=false`
* `druid.generic.useThreeValueLogicForNativeFilters=true`

> These configurations are deprecated and scheduled for removal.

Reviewer 2: Do they have to actively remove these configs or if they leave them will they be ignored? IIRC, they'll be ignored, but we should be explicit on whether or not they need to actively do anything or not. e.g.

```
If these are in your configuration, they'll be ignored once the legacy mode is removed.
```

Reviewer: i imagine we might make warning logs on startup if we detect the configs that no longer do anything

## Migrate to SQL compliant mode

If your business logic relies on the behavior of legacy mode, you have the following options to operate Druid in SQL compatible null handling mode:

> * Modify your ingestion SQL and ingestion specs to handle nulls at ingestion time.

Reviewer 2: Maybe lead with the impact:

```suggestion
* Modify all incoming data to change nulls but preserve the same behavior as legacy mode. Update your ingestion SQL queries and ingestion specs to handle nulls at ingestion time.
```

>     This means that you are modifying incoming data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This method modifies incoming data.
```

    For example, replacing a null for a string column with an empty string or a 0 for a numeric column.
    However, it means that your existing queries should operate as if Druid were in legacy mode.
    If you do not care about preserving null values, this is a good option for you.

> * Update your SQL queries to be SQL compliant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Preserve null values and update all of your SQL queries to be ANSI SQL compliant.
```

> * Update your SQL queries to be SQL compliant.

Reviewer 2: IMO put an empty line between the two options to more visually separate them

    This means you can preserve the incoming data with nulls intact.
    However, you must rewrite any affected client-side queries to be SQL compliant.
    If you have a requirement to preserve null values, choose this option.

> ### Replace null values at ingestion time

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to the corresponding anchor from each bullet point.

    },
    "dataSchema": {
      "dataSource": "inline_data_native",
      "timestampSpec": {
        "column": "time",
        "format": "iso"
      },
      "dimensionsSpec": {
        "dimensions": [
          "string_example",
          {
            "type": "long",
            "name": "number_example"
          }
        ]
      },
      "granularitySpec": {
        "queryGranularity": "none",
        "rollup": false,
        "segmentGranularity": "MONTH"
      },
      "transformSpec": {
        "transforms": [
          {
            "type": "expression",
            "name": "string_example",
            "expression": "COALESCE(\"string_example\",'')"
          },
          {
            "type": "expression",
            "name": "number_example",
            "expression": "NVL(\"number_example\",0)"
          }
        ]
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Druid ingests the data with no null values as follows:

| `__time` | `string_examle` | `number_example`|
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`| `my_string`| 99 |
| `2024-01-02T00:00:00.000Z`| `empty`| 0 |
| `2024-01-03T00:00:00.000Z`| `empty`| 0 |

### Coerce empty strings to null at ingestion time

> In legacy mode, Druid recognizes empty strings as nulls for equality comparison.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In legacy mode, Druid recognized empty strings as nulls for equality comparison.
```

If your queries rely on empty strings to represent nulls, you can coerce empty strings to null at ingestion time using NULLIF.

For example, consider the following sample input data:

```json
{"time":"2024-01-01T00:00:00.000Z","string_example":"my_string"}
{"time":"2024-01-02T00:00:00.000Z","string_example":""}
{"time":"2024-01-03T00:00:00.000Z","string_example":null}
```

> In legacy mode, Druid would write an empty string for the third record.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In legacy mode, Druid wrote an empty string for the third record.
```

> Therefore the following query would return 2:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore the following query returned 2:
```

        "type": "json"
      }
    },
    "tuningConfig": {
      "type": "index_parallel",
      "partitionsSpec": {
        "type": "dynamic"
      }
    },
    "dataSchema": {
      "dataSource": "null_string",
      "timestampSpec": {
        "column": "time",
        "format": "iso"
      },
      "transformSpec": {
        "transforms": [
          {
            "type": "expression",
            "expression": "case_searched((\"string_example\" == ''),null,\"string_example\")",
            "name": "string_example"
          }
        ]
      },
      "dimensionsSpec": {
        "dimensions": [
          "string_example"
        ]
      },
      "granularitySpec": {
        "queryGranularity": "none",
        "rollup": false,
        "segmentGranularity": "month"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Druid ingests the data with no empty strings as follows:

| `__time` | `string_examle` |
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`| `my_string`|
| `2024-01-02T00:00:00.000Z`| `null`|
| `2024-01-03T00:00:00.000Z`| `null`|

Therefore `SELECT count(*) FROM "null_string" WHERE "string_example" IS NULL` returns 2.

### Rewrite your queries to be SQL compliant

> If you want to maintain null values in your data within Druid, you can use the following SQL compliant querying strategies to achieve the same results as legacy null handling:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to maintain null values in your data within Druid, you can use the following ANSI SQL compliant querying strategies to achieve the same results as legacy null handling:
```

- Modify inequality queries to include null values.
  For example, `x <> 'some value'` becomes `(x <> 'some value' OR x IS NULL)`.
- Use COALESCE or NVL to replace nulls with a value.
  For example, `x + 1` becomes `NVL(numeric_value, 0)+1`

Consider the following Druid datasource `null_example`:

| `__time` | `string_examle` | `number_example`|
| -- | -- | -- |
| `2024-01-01T00:00:00.000Z`| `my_string`| 99 |
| `2024-01-02T00:00:00.000Z`| `empty`| 0 |
| `2024-01-03T00:00:00.000Z`| `null`| null |

Druid excludes null strings from equality comparisons. For example:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) AS count_example
FROM "null_example"
WHERE "string_example"<> 'my_string'
```

Druid returns 1 because null is considered unknown: neither equal nor unequal to the value.

To count null values in the result, you can use an OR operator:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) AS count_example
FROM "null_example"
WHERE ("string_example"<> 'my_string') OR "string_example" IS NULL
```

Druid returns 2.

> To achieve the same result, you could use IS DISTINCT FROM for null-safe comparison:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To achieve the same result, you can use IS DISTINCT FROM for null-safe comparison:
```

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) as count_example
FROM "null_example"
WHERE "string_example" IS DISTINCT FROM 'my_string'
```

Similarly, arithmetic operators on null return null. For example:

```sql
SELECT "number_example" + 1 AS additon_example
FROM "null_example"
```

> Druid returns the following because, according to the SQL standard, null + any value is null:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Druid returns the following because null + any value is null for the ANSI SQL standard:
```

  ~ or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  ~ distributed with this work for additional information
  ~ regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  ~ to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  ~ "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  ~ with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  ~
  ~   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  ~
  ~ Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  ~ software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  ~ "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  ~ KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  ~ specific language governing permissions and limitations
  ~ under the License.
-->
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

In Apache Druid 28.0.0, the default [null handling](../querying/sql-data-types.md#null-values) mode changed to be compliant with the ANSI SQL standard.
This guide provides strategies for Druid operators who rely on legacy Druid null handling behavior in their applications to transition to SQL compliant mode.

> Legacy mode is scheduled to be removed from Druid. 

Reviewer: nit: scheduled seems not quite correct since i'm not certain we've fully committed to which version it will be removed in yet

> Legacy mode is scheduled to be removed from Druid. 

Author: ```suggestion
Legacy mode is planned for removal from Druid. 
```

## SQL compliant null handling

> As of Druid 28.0.0, Druid writes segments in a SQL compatible null handling mode by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of Druid 28.0.0, Druid writes segments in an ANSI SQL compatible null handling mode by default.
```

This means that Druid stores null values distinctly from empty strings for string dimensions and distinctly from 0 for numeric dimensions.

This can impact your application behavior because the ANSI SQL standard defines any comparison to null to be unknown.
According to this three-valued logic, `x <> 'some value'` only returns non-null values.

> The default Druid configurations for 28.0.0 and later that enable SQL compatible null handling mode are the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default Druid configurations for 28.0.0 and later that enable ANSI SQL compatible null handling mode are the following:
```

* `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans=true`
* `druid.generic.useThreeValueLogicForNativeFilters=true` 

Follow the [Null handling tutorial](../tutorials/tutorial-sql-null.md) to learn how the default null handling works in Druid.

## Legacy null handling and two-value logic

Prior to Druid 28.0.0, Druid defaulted to a legacy mode which stored default values instead of nulls.
In legacy mode, Druid created segments with the following characteristics at ingestion time:

- String columns couldn't distinguish an empty string, '', from null.
    Therefore, Druid treated them both as interchangeable values.
- Numeric columns couldn't represent null valued rows.
    Therefore Druid stored 0 instead of null. 

The Druid configurations for the deprecated legacy mode were the following:

* `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=true`
* `druid.expressions.useStrictBooleans=false`
* `druid.generic.useThreeValueLogicForNativeFilters=true`

These configurations are deprecated and scheduled for removal.
After the configurations are removed, Druid will ignore them if they exist in your configuration files and use the default SQL compliant mode.

## Migrate to SQL compliant mode

> If your business logic relies on the behavior of legacy mode, you have the following options to operate Druid in SQL compatible null handling mode:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your business logic relies on the behavior of legacy mode, you have the following options to operate Druid in an ANSI SQL compatible null handling mode:
```

> - Modify incoming data to either [avoid nulls](#replace-null-values-at-ingestion-time) or [avoid empty strings](#coerce-empty-strings-to-null-at-ingestion-time) to achieve the same query behavior as legacy mode. This means modifying your ingestion SQL and ingestion specs to handle nulls or empty strings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Modify incoming data to either [avoid nulls](#replace-null-values-at-ingestion-time) or [avoid empty strings](#coerce-empty-strings-to-null-at-ingestion-time) to achieve the same query behavior as legacy mode. This means modifying your ingestion SQL queries and ingestion specs to handle nulls or empty strings.
```

    For example, replacing a null for a string column with an empty string or a 0 for a numeric column.
    However, it means that your existing queries should operate as if Druid were in legacy mode.
    If you do not care about preserving null values, this is a good option for you.

> - Preserve null values and update all of your SQL queries to be ANSI SQL compliant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Preserve null values and [update all of your SQL queries to be ANSI SQL compliant](#rewrite-your-queries-to-be-sql-compliant).
```

    This means you can preserve the incoming data with nulls intact.

>     However, you must rewrite any affected client-side queries to be SQL compliant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    However, you must rewrite any affected client-side queries to be ANSI SQL compliant.
```
